Sarah Sheets
Rod Spellman
ENGL 151-001
14 April 2023


Rocks Breaking the Waves: The WKKK’s Impact on Feminism


        There’s a reason why people divided the feminist movement in sections called “waves”. Waves are surges of energy that emerge from the ocean. They arrive at the shore and then retract themselves back into the water. If we envision this in the terms of the feminist movement, these “waves” have powerful impacts on society, and after some time they fade away until the next one occurs. But what happens if something or someone was to intervene between these waves, and create more havoc than there was before? Such as a rock breaking the wave before it ever reaches the shore. The Women’s Ku Klux Klan left a scar on feminism by creating what appears to be an exclusive feminist group, and tainted the views others had on the progressive feminist movement. While some suffragists were also exclusive, they were not as toxic as the WKKK. The group was founded in 1923 in Little Rock, Arkansas, shortly after the first wave of feminism (which ended in 1920 after women earned the right to vote). The WKKK stood to improve life in the home, political equality, and religious equality for “pure” American women. They shared similar interests to the KKK in regards to their “Americanism”. As stated by William Robinson Pattangal, a former legislator and attorney general, “The fundamental wrong is in the Klan idea of what makes Americanism. It assumes that this quality can only be born in a man or woman who happens to see the light first on American soil, that it is born in all such, and that no one else can achieve it.” Both the KKK and the WKK believed solely in privileges and rights for certain Americans. They did not believe that people of other races, ethnicities, different religious views or immigrants deserve the same treatment that the KKK and WKKK want. Due to these similar views, the WKKK excludes women from all over the world who are not, Protestant, white Americans. Women in the Klan created the negative stereotypes on what feminism is after their attempt to become a progressive feminist group.


Due to the amount of exclusivity, women and others who were not involved in the Klan were considered part of an “alien world” (Smith).  Klanswomen were very selective about the women they initiated, by instilling a membership fee, pledge of loyalty, and questions about the individual’s beliefs. Maureen Elgersman at the University of Southern Maine wrote, “although the $10 membership fee was not completely cost prohibitive, several members were probably drawn from the middle class.” To put that into comparison, a membership fee to the WKKK would cost roughly $150 in present times. That is a lot of money to spend in order to sign up for a group, and even today it would prohibit a lot of people from joining. This shows that the WKKK wanted women of a higher class to become members, and did not want to associate with women who could not afford to spend on “luxuries”. 
Their loyalty pledge states, “I…freely and voluntarily promise pledge and fully guarantee a lofty respect, whole-hearted loyalty and an unwavering devotion at all times and under any and all circumstances and conditions from this day and date forward to the Empress of the Symbolic Realm, Queens of the Golden Mask (Incorporated)”, (Strom). The WKKK wanted women to be committed to this group entirely, even if complications were to arise. They expected the level of loyalty that people take to the grave. This was not some “club” that a few women were a part of, this was another layer of their identity. The signature required at the end of this pledge shows the WKKK’s determination to create unwavering members. Not all women want to be associated with something to this degree. This pledge is asking for undying loyalty which not everyone wants to give. This also creates another level of exclusion. The WKKK did not want to have women within the group that were not willing to devote themselves to this organization. 


The initiation questions that were required are to verify that each Klanswomen is a Protestant, “true-American”: 


What is your religious faith? Catholic, Jew, Protestant, or Mohammedan? 
What are your political affiliations?
Do you owe any allegiance to any foreign nation, Government, institution, people or Ruler? 
Do you esteem the United States of America, its flag and Constitution above any other nation, flag and Government, and will you ever be loyal in supporting the same?


        The first question is to clearly identify what the woman’s religious beliefs were, and in order to be a part of this group, it had to be Protestant. Due to the fact that this was the first question, it is evident that the WKKK prioritized religion first. They could identify race by looking at someone, so they needed to dig deeper in order to prove that they “belonged” in the group. The third question is to rule out any affiliation with other countries, or the people that are a part of them. This expands on the idea that only “true Americans” are allowed and accepted within this group. The fourth question supports this American ideal by asking if the woman will be loyal and supportive of the United States of America. These questions were designed to eliminate prospects for the WKKK in order to keep everyone’s ideals and beliefs the same within the organization. Although they stood for equality amongst men, they did not want everyone to be a part of it. 


Not only were the women in the Klan exclusive and hateful towards others who were different from them, but they also spread rumors about Jews, Catholics, and Blacks in an attempt to turn society against them. Maureen Elgersman says, “In addition to voting along lines of 100% Americanism, WKKK women have been characterized as a ‘poison squad of whispering women’ who spread gossip about Jews, Catholics, and Blacks, with economic and political results that were ‘enormously and disastrously successful.”’ Not only were rumors thrown around about Jews, Catholics, and black people, but the WKKK organized parades and food drives, which by first glance looked like “sorority events” (Smith). This does not sound detrimental at first, however these gatherings were a way for the WKKK to lobby for “national quotas for immigration, racial segregation, and anti-miscegenation laws — and [proselytize] the ‘eternal supremacy’ of the white race as an opposition to the ‘rising tide of color,’” (Smith). The WKKK used socialization as their main tactic for attempting to maintain segregation, as opposed to the much more violent tactics of the KKK. They created the vision that they were a progressive feminist group, however their beliefs differ significantly than what feminism stands for. This exclusive toxicity strengthened the hatred of this group, and contributed to the negative connotations that are associated with feminism. 


Due to the amount of violence that the women of the Klan started, it created the much familiar stereotype that feminist movements are just a bunch of “angry white women.” Although the WKKK was not truly a feminist group, their appearance of one influenced society’s views on who feminists are. Even though the WKKK was not seen as violent as its parent organization, the KKK, they still supported violent behavior such as lynchings. Kathleen Blee, author of Women of the Klan: Racism and Gender in the 1920s, states in her book:


Klanswomen tended not to be involved in physical violence and rioting, but there were exceptions. In the aftermath of a 1924 Klan riot in Wilkinsburg, Pennsylvania, Mamie H. Bittner, a thirty-nine-year-old mother of three children and member of the Homestead, Pennsylvania, WKKK testified that she, along with thousands of other Klanswomen paraded through town, carrying heavy maple riot clubs. Morover Bittner claimed that the WKKK was teaching its members to murder and kill in the interest of the Klan. 


Killing on behalf of white supremacy is a massive issue that has been occurring for a long time. Even suffragists who supported progressive movements for women, were exclusive of other races. However, the WKKK enhanced the level of exclusion by creating a toxic, violent, feminist-appearing group. They supported the idea of implementing violence onto others in order to make a stance. 


        The Women of the Ku Klux Klan was an organization of women who appeared to be feminist, but in reality, contradicted what feminism stands for. By definition, feminism means, “the belief in social, economic, and political equality of the sexes,” (Brunell). While the WKKK supported that equality, they only wanted it for a selective group. Feminism is not just for white women or black women, it is for all women, which is why the WKKK was never a truly feminist organization. A manifesto published by the Women of the Ku Klux Klan states, “WE BELIEVE in the equality of men and women in political, religious, fraternal, civic, and social affairs wherein there should be no distinction of sex.” These women wanted equality and the same opportunities as men. They wanted to be free of old traditions and become individuals that are not just a piece of property. However, they later on went to say, “WE BELIEVE that the perpetuity of our nation rests upon the solidarity and purity of our native-born, white, Gentile, Protestant men and women.” The WKKK did not want equality for women of other races and ethnicities. They believed that the success of America rested upon racial purity. This makes this group composed of contradictions between their beliefs, their exclusivity, and their violent and toxic behavior. While they tried to trick society into believing that they were feminists, they could never be. 


































































Bibliography:
Blee, Kathleen M. Women of the Klan Racism and Gender in the 1920s. University of California Press, 2009. 
Boomer, Lee. “Women of the Ku Klux Klan.” Women & the American Story, 8 Feb. 2023, https://wams.nyhistory.org/confidence-and-crises/jazz-age/women-of-the-kkk/. 
Brunell, Laura, and Elinor Burkett. “Feminism.” Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 7 Apr. 2023, https://www.britannica.com/topic/feminism. 
Cataneo, Emily. “A Brief History of the Women’s KKK .” JSTOR Daily, 14 Oct. 2020, https://daily.jstor.org/a-brief-history-of-the-womens-kkk/.
Elgersman - Lee (ed.), Maureen, "Women of the Ku Klux Klan (KKK)" (2003). The Griot. 27. https://digitalcommons.usm.maine.edu/griot/27
“Inflation Rate between 1920-2023: Inflation Calculator.” $10 In 1920 → 2023 | Inflation Calculator, https://www.in2013dollars.com/us/inflation/1920?amount=10#:~:text=Value%20of%20%2410%20from%201920,of%20%24140.42%20over%20103%20years. 
Pattangall, William Robinson. “‘Is the Ku Klux Un-American?’” The Forum, Sept. 1925, http://americainclass.org/sources/becomingmodern/divisions/text1/colcommentaryklan.pdf.   Accessed 26 Feb. 2023. 
Smith, Laura. “The KKK Started a Branch Just for Women in the 1920s, and Half a Million Joined.” Medium, Timeline, 20 Sept. 2017, https://timeline.com/the-kkk-started-a-branch-just-for-women-in-the-1920s-and-half-a-million-joined-72ab1439b78b.   
Strom, Adam. “Primary Source: Women's Klan Loyalty Pledge.” Re, 9 Nov. 2020, https://reimaginingmigration.org/primary-source-womens-klan-loyalty-pledge/.